Hey everyone welcome back.
In this election we're going to focus on getting comfortable in GIMP itself.
And first of all of course we need to launch guimpe So let's go ahead and do that.
And when we launch guimpe for the very first time you may be presented with something like this you
feel all of us are tiny windows obviously M..
In a small windowed format not minimized but.
And then you open it up and you go well.
This is a bit odd.
Now this is an extreme example because I have multiple monitors plugged in.
So let me go and grab the other two windows that gimp consists of.
I decided to open up on my other monitor.
So here we go we have here three parts to the interface and as far as I'm aware it opens like this on
most platforms as well.
I tried it on my Mac and it did exactly the same and I hope it didn't take too long for gimped to open
for you on my Mac.
It certainly did.
It took around 15 minutes.
So we've got a split interface and this gives you great customization it allows you to move things about.
Got multiple monitors.
You could have this bit that's in the middle the main part of the program that you could have that full
screen on one of your screens and all of the tools in all of your other things on another screen as
well allow you to separate your interface and working on a picture and focussing on it.
However this can also lead to quite a bit of confusion because along with this interface being split
and spread out you've got pretty much full control over everything you see.
And so let's start with what's known as the dockable dialogues or in this case these individual windows.
So if we go ahead now and grab the main window of gimp and then the windows selection we can see we've
got some options.
And the first one I'm going to try out here is single window mode.
Now a couple of reasons why I will be using that throughout the course you do not have to follow but
I suggest you might want to try this unless you're used to a very splits interface like gimp has.
Most programs do have a single Windows mode just to save yourself some time.
Now this looks like a a mode and it's not it's more of a it's a toggle switch you click that and everything
comes back into one lump.
However if you take something out again and look at this it will still have a tick against it and your
need to unstick it and tickets again to get it back into single Windows mode.
So we have our single window mode here and at this point we can there are invisible borders in some
places where you can put all things out and adjust the windows to your heart's content.
Now I can see my icons around here some of them can be made larger Still if you want and we'll get into
that in a few moments.
So dockable dialogue Well if we go ahead and just have a look at the left hand side of the screen for
the moment at the very top we've got the menu bar which exists on most devices and then we have a sort
of selection of tools underneath that by default.
There is the tools options.
And this is our first example of a dockable dialogue.
I can grab the tab at the very top.
Lift it out and drop it somewhere else.
And it separates it into its own little window.
Now if we have a look at Windows again we can see it's still says it's in a single window mode when
it really isn't.
Now that should get ticked.
Maybe they'll fix that and then later release.
But you can see here you can drag dockable dialogues here.
Sorry go ahead with the tools we can pop over there and it will snap to this part of the interface and
it's true for this area over here as well.
We can separate those out and recombine them.
Now these two particular dialogues these dockable dialogues on the left and the right can be separated
wholly or individually so we can drag the layers out.
We can drag the channels out etc. etc. and these top parts here are called tabs and the tabs allow us
to customize our dockable dialogues as much as we want.
So you can drag a tab in with another one if you wanted to and drag it out again to your heart's content
and if you wanted to stack them instead of having them next to one another so you can click between
them.
What you can also do is drag it's underneath or above and you have to be quite careful with the mouse.
It's very difficult sometimes to get the right location but we can see the blue bar across the bottom
which will put the channels underneath.
And if I lift it up we get the blue bar at the top and now channels is at the top.
And you can do that in any of the dockable dialogues we can do it over the left here.
We can do it over the right etc etc. And now we've got three layers over on the right.
Now let's bring everything back together.
I'm not sure I think it was oh there we go we can split it.
The other way as well that was pure accident.
But there we go.
As you can see it can be quite easy to get yourself in a bit of a twist if you're not careful.
And this is all of course about rearranging the interface itself to your heart's desire.
And this can be both a strength and a weakness depending on yourself and whether you're competent enough
with the interface and comfortable enough with the interface to make sure that if you did get yourself
in a pickle you can get back again next to these dockable dialogues.
There is a little arrow on all of them and it will say configure this tab and that is the current tab
that's open.
If we just have a look at the tools options on the left hand side if we click on that we will see at
the top there is an option for that particular tab that we have open.
This also gives us the OPs option further down to add a tab so we could add the channels that we can
see over on the right we can add one of those dialogues over on the left or any of the other options
we've got underneath.
We can close a tab and of course if we close the tab it disappears.
Dragonball dialogues how do we get one of those back.
Well there are a couple of ways we could go to the window selection go to dockable dialogues and find
it.
It was the tools options.
It comes back it's come back over here.
We can bring it back over here and boom back again.
The other option of course if we went ahead and close that again is we just open up ad tab and tools
options and drag it across.
And of course the final way of doing this we could go to windows and see all recently closed docs.
Now in this case has it would happen.
It doesn't actually show me anything which is not that helpful and that might be because I'm in single
window mode.
If I separate that out.
If we bring our tool box back across and close that and close the channel brushes we go to Windows.
Recently open.
There we go.
Bring that back and that one back.
So it's very easy to bring things back.
It's very easy to rearrange this to your heart's content but it is also very destructive as well as
interface because you can close absolutely everything and get stuck essentially And one of the first
things before I go and destroy my interface.
But I want to show you here is things like these brushes down the bottom and the lower right.
They can be a bit smaller if you're trying to work out what they are and one of the options under your
preview style is tiny extra small small medium large extra large enormous and gigantic if you switch
it's a gigantic.
You can see that these brushes are a lot bigger and that's incredibly helpful when you need to focus
on some detail.
But we need to have an overview.
We can go to the preview size and switch it back to maybe medium.
Whilst we're having a look at this we can see we can view it as a list.
Viewers had grid etc. etc..
And finally we've got move to screen at the very bottom.
And this as it like as you can probably guess moves it to another monitor.
If you've got more than one monitor attached this will display whether you've got another monitor or
not.
I did skip over detach tab and lock tab to Dopp detached tab is the same as clicking on brushes and
dragging it out.
It will just detach it straight away for you.
And we can see here lock tab to dock prevents you moving it anywhere else which can be great if you're
used to destroying stuff.
So let's go ahead and unlock that.
Pop that back over here.
Well missed.
There we go.
That's organized.
And then finally we just need the tool options back which is under window nothing under recently closed
so dockable dialogue's tool options and bring it back over here and there we go we're pretty much back
to how we started.
And of course there may be that time that the configuration is so confusing.
You've altered things and you just cannot get back to it.
So let's go ahead and just close some stuff down and puts move this over here.
So you've completely changed it around.
You've close things down you've moved things to somewhere else and you're a bit confused and you want
to get back to how it was when you started.
Well we can reset the view completely in regard to the edit menu and go to preferences that are similar
to tools and options on many other programs.
So edit and preferences.
It gives us the preferences for guimpe itself.
And there are lots of options in here.
Feel free to look through the mall if you'd like.
However what I'm going to go down to is window management down at the bottom.
Once you've gone to window management we can reset saved window positions to the default values and
it says here it will happen the next time you start guimpe.
Okay so let's go ahead and click okay.
Close down guimpe.
Open it back up again.
We should find.
Yes it splits into a million pieces.
Now you particularly like a setting that you found in and then layout you like using you can of course
go to preferences go down to window management again and save your window positions.
So that's especially useful if you've got multiple monitors as well because it means that if you've
put things on specific screens they will now open up there and we can see by default it will save your
window positions on exit so the window positions are programmed linked not firewall linked.
Sometimes in certain programs the default or the configuration that you're working with is saved in
the file itself.
That's not the case in GIMP.
It is global.
So if you make a change to your interface it will be reflected across all of your projects.
Unless of course you until the save window positions on exit.
In which case it will start up on whatever your save window positions are.
Every time I like leaving it like that with it ticked so that when I open it up it looks the same as
it looked before.
And that also helps if you guys are watching that it's not changing all the time.
And quickly before I go ahead and go to the challenge you will notice that under window there is an
option for the tool box itself.
It's a separate entity it's a little bit confusing at first but it's under the window menu.
It's not a dot dockable dialogue or anything along those lines.
So window tool box if you managed to delete that which you can do if your windows are separated because
I brought all mine together it's unlikely I'll be able to do that without separating it first.
And with that in mind I think it's time for a challenge.
And the challenge is going to be to rebuild your workspace.
So take a screenshot of the original interface or just write down or even take photos on your phone
of the original interface.
Now go ahead and play with the interface move around your tabs remove everything you can from the scene
and get comfortable with the interface by rebuilding it.
This will take you a few minutes of discovery and fun as you go I hope.
Do have fun ones to do in these challenges and do try these challenges as well.
It may seem a bit mundane to rebuild your workspace thinking are never going to destroy it but at one
point in the all life in guimpe you are going to do that so let's get comfortable with it now by rebuilding
it.
Pause a video and I will see back in a few moments.
Okay guys welcome back.
Let's go ahead and rebuild our workspace by first destroying it.
Okay so let's go ahead and open up guimpe.
Now that guimpe is opening let's trash the interface itself.
I'm going to go into or sorry out of single window mode for a moment and just close down my tool box
and tools options.
And my layers and patterns and come back and go back to single window mode so it's as bare bones as
it can possibly be at the moment.
The danger here of course is because this layout is saved with guimpe.
If we come back again later on and perhaps you've moved it for some other reason that we we come like
this so that is no good.
Now I've taken a screen shot on my of the screens are just open that up.
Brilliant that's all open up.
And let's start by just adding the things that we need so I could of course go to recently closed docs
and reopen them are not going to do that at this point nor am I just going to reset the default.
I want to learn the interface and go through just its general manipulation.
Ma jump straight to the destructive stage of course.
So here we have layers so that's pop layers on and then this is just going to be reeling these off channels
and then paths just happens to be that they're all in a row.
And after that it was the undo history.
So that's that bit done.
Of course the next one we try an ADD which was the brushes says go to Windows dockable dialogue's brushes.
We don't want that there we want it underneath.
And this is where it can get a little bit funny as you try and drag it to the bottom of the window.
In fact in this case I'm not going to be able to do it in the reason for that is it's beneath my staff
bar because gimp isn't full screen so let's make it full screen.
Now I should be able to Dockett just underneath.
There we go.
And now we've got the brushes selected we can go down and do dockable dialogues.
And what was the next one Patons.
I think paton's track that down.
Excellent.
And then the final one over this side was something called Radiance gradients.
There we go.
We can see that some of those do have short cuts and a lot of the things in GIMP.
There are a lot of shortcuts you can see that they do have the necessary control keys in the menus itself.
Okay so that's this site done.
And then what do we have here.
So we have our tools options and.
W tools options tools options right at the top as doctor over here that's bringing it across here.
Now one of the things that were missing is something called the tool box and it's not under the dockable
dialogue's.
Interesting.
It's here.
Under a new tool box control and B so are under the control can try and control the beat.
There we go it's added it.
And can we add lots of them.
Nope.
That's all is a good thing.
Now it's split these two up here and you'll notice with the tool box itself you can't actually drag
that about once it's placed very easily.
So in this case I'm going to move the tools options so it's underneath the tool box and we've got the
right width.
Now just for completeness of course I'm going to go in and go to Edit preferences and I'm going to click
on save window positions.
You don't really have to do that if you've got a save window positions on exit ticked.
But just for completeness.
And I think if I switch this to brushes and this two layers that is how it would open up as she started.
Brilliant.
How did you guys get on.
I hope you've had a bit of fun playing with the interface.
I know we're not drawing yet but mastering this interface really is important early on so it doesn't
hold you back when you really want to get down to the nitty gritty of creating some wonderful art.
Please share your experiences with us and of course I will see you guys in the next lecture.